documentation/10_tls_with_exasol (#12)
exasol/tutorials: tls/doc/tls_in_udfs.md

# TLS in User Defined Functions (UDFs)

## Before you Start

If you haven't already, I recommend you read our ["TLS introduction"](tls_introduction.md) to familiarize yourself with the basic concepts of TLS.

Then, please read the article ["TLS with Exasol"](tls_with_exasol.md) as a primer on where Exasol expects TLS certificates to be installed.

You should also learn about Exasol's [BucketFS](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/bucketfs.htm) filesystem.

### A Concrete Example With Java

To make the tutorial hands-on, you will have interactive parts that demonstrate TLS certificate handling with Java.

Why Java? 

First, we have a ready-to-use UDF in Java that lists certificates. Second, Java certificate handling is the hardest one. If you manage that, the other ones will be no problem for you.

## Prerequisites

You will need:

1. A Java Development Kit (JDK 11 or later, we recommend [OpenJDK](https://openjdk.org/install/))
2. `keytool` program (comes with the JDK)
3. [`curl`](https://curl.se/) to access BucketFS and download files from the internet

## UDFs

> A User Defined Function (short "UDF") is a way to extend the Exasol database with new features that can be called from within Exasol SQL statements. Basically, a UDF is a program that runs on the Exasol cluster in the context of an SQL query. The UDF gets its parameters from the SQL statement, and its return values can be used by other parts of the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A User Defined Function (UDF) allows you to extend the Exasol database with custom functionality that can be invoked directly from SQL statements. Basically, a UDF is a program that runs on the Exasol cluster in the context of an SQL query. The UDF gets its parameters from the SQL statement, and its return values can be used by other parts of the query.
```

Each of the first four columns corresponds to a path element for the so-called "distinguished name" (DN) of the certificate. Think of that name as a unique identifier. The elements are "common name" (CN), "organization" (O), "organizational unit" (OU), and "country" (C).

You can see in which time frame the certificate is valid in the columns `VALID_AFTER` and `VALID_BEFORE`.

### Self-issued Certificates and UDFs

If you want your UDF to connect to a service on your own premises, chances are that the corresponding TLS certificate was issued by your own CA or your organization's CA for that matter.

This is where it gets interesting. You won't find that certificate in the language container. You could build your own
container, but that requires additional expertise and is beyond this tutorial's scope.

A better way to use your own certificates with UDFs is to create a truststore in [BucketFS](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/bucketfs.htm). BucketFS is a distributed filesystem that makes files available to all data nodes on an Exasol cluster. It is also the only filesystem accessible from a UDF, except the read-only filesystem of the language container.

> In short, you upload something to BucketFS on a node of your choosing, and Exasol takes care of copying the files to all other nodes in the background. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In short, you upload something to BucketFS on a node of your choice, and Exasol takes care of copying the files to all other nodes in the background. 
```

Does the truststore password help here? Not really. Since the same password is used for reading and writing, you cannot keep it completely secret. That would only be the case if the truststore itself used asymmetric encryption. So if the truststore password isn't the answer, you need to protect the file instead.

In an operating system this is usually achieved by restricting write access to the truststore to privileged users. You can emulate this for UDFs.

1. [Create a private bucket](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/create_new_bucket_in_bucketfs_service.htm) that only privileged users (e.g., the DBA) have write access to
2. Chose a non-guessable write-password for the bucket
3. Chose a non-guessable read-password for the bucket that differs from the write-password
4. [Create a connection object for the bucket](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/database_concepts/bucketfs/database_access.htm) with the read-password
5. [Grant access to the connection object](https://docs.exasol.com/db/latest/sql/grant.htm?Highlight=connection) to the users that will use the truststore in their UDFs
6. Upload the truststore file to that bucket using the write-password

> In summary, we propose to live with a simple truststore password and to refer to the items in the list above to gain an acceptable level of security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, we propose using a simple truststore password while relying on the measures listed above to achieve an acceptable level of security.
```

## Summary

* User Defined Functions run in a sandbox. 

> * The only filesystem the sandbox sees is BucketFS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* BucketFS is the only filesystem visible to the sandbox.
```

> * If you want to use your own Certification Agency (CA), we recommend that you generate a new truststore that only contains the CAs you trust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you want to use your own Certificate Authority (CA), we recommend generating a new truststore containing only the CAs you trust.
```

> * Upload it to a private bucket, create a connection object to allow UDFs to read it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Upload it to a private bucket and create a connection object to allow UDFs to read it.
```

> * Then grant access to that connection object to users who should be allowed to use that UDF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Then grant access to that connection object to the users who should be allowed to use the UDF.
```
